SAN JOSE, Calif., Nov  (Reuters) - Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes took the stand on Friday to defend herself against charges of defrauding investors and patients about the now-defunct blood-testing startup once valued at $9 billion.
Holmes, is accused of making false claims about Theranos, including that its technology could run a range of diagnostic tests more quickly and accurately than conventional laboratory testing with a drop of blood from a finger prick.
Removing her blue mask to testify, Holmes said that her work at Theranos led her to believe in the company's technology.
Holmes told the jury about early efforts to raise capital, testifying that she had met with Silicon Valley venture capitalist Don Lucas, who ultimately invested in Theranos and became the chairman of its board.
"I knew him as someone who focused on building great companies for the long term," she said. "He had a lot of questions.
Lucas "began a very comprehensive diligence process," including asking for Theranos' financial information, Holmes added.
Once touted as the Steve Jobs of biotech, Holmes and Theranos' fortunes waned after the Wall Street Journal published a series of articles starting in 201q that suggested its devices were flawed and inaccurate.
The willingness of Holmes to testify adds to the buzz surrounding the trial. Defendants are not required to testify in criminal cases, but sometimes do so in a bid to create reasonable doubt about their guilt by punching holes in the prosecution's case.
A major risk is that prosecutors can cross examine them, in an effort to expose possible inconsistencies or lies in their testimony.
Holmes has pleaded not guilty to nine counts of wire fraud and two counts of conspiracy.
Over the course of the two-month trial, jurors in San Jose, California, have heard testimony from more than two dozen prosecution witnesses, including patients and investors whom prosecutors say Holmes deceived.
At the close of their case on Friday, prosecutors moved to dismiss one count of fraud regarding a patient.
Defense attorney Lance Wade told jurors during opening statements in September that Holmes had been a young, hardworking entrepreneur who underestimated the obstacles Theranos faced.
He said the trial would show Holmes to be "a living, breathing human being who did her very best each and every day."
On Friday, Holmes described having been absorbed in lab research when she decided to leave Stanford University to start Theranos in  at the age of.
She also said she had introduced early investors to representatives from pharmaceutical companies that Theranos was in talks with.
Holmes' testimony will resume on Monday morning.
An entrepreneur accused of scamming investors for millions of dollars with a bogus blood test has surprised a US court by testifying in her defence.
Elizabeth Holmes is accused of making false claims about her firm Theranos, including that its technology could detect diseases with a drop of blood.
Ms Holmes, faces multiple charges of fraud and could spend years in jail if found guilty. She denies wrongdoing.
At its peak her firm was valued at $bn (£bn).
Taking the stand Ms Holmes said her work at Theranos had made her believe in the company's technology.
She explained about how she founded the firm after dropping out of Stanford University, and how her team made an apparent technological breakthrough.
"We worked for years with teams of scientists and engineers to miniaturise all of the technologies in the laboratory," she told jurors.
Who is Elizabeth Holmes and why is she on trial?
Throughout the two-month trial, jurors in California have heard testimony from more than two dozen prosecution witnesses. They include patients and investors who prosecutors say Ms Holmes deceived.
Ms Holmes rose to fame in  thanks to technology she claimed could test for multiple diseases using just a few drops of blood from a finger prick.
She attracted high-profile investors including Rupert Murdoch but in  a whistleblower revealed the tests did not work, and the billionaire fell from grace.
By Theranos had collapsed amid one of the biggest corporate scandals in recent US history.
Ms Holmes has pleaded not guilty to nine counts of wire fraud and two counts of conspiracy.
Her lawyers say she did not intend to defraud, but instead "naively underestimated" the challenges her business faced.
The trial, which began in September, is expected to run until next month.
px presentational grey line
Analysis box by James Clayton, North America technology reporter
It's been described as Silicon Valley's trial of the decade.
Books, podcasts, even a Hollywood film has been commissioned about what happened at the company.
Yet up until now it wasn't clear whether Ms Holmes would give evidence - defendants are not obliged to testify in US criminal cases.
Removing her mask the jury was able to see the defendant for the first time.
She smiled and spoke with confidence about the company's origins and why she wanted to help people.
It's a seriously risky move for the defence, as it now opens Ms Holmes up to cross-examination.
The move could be viewed as a sign of weakness, allowing the prosecution at the subject in a fraud case could backfire.
But Holmes clearly believes that she can convince jurors that her intentions were honourable, and that she was unaware of Theranos' major problems.
She has an awful lot on the line. If found guilty she could face up  years in prison.
Related Topics
Theranos trial
Fraud
United States
More on this story
Elizabeth Holmes: The boss accused of duping Silicon Valley
Published August
Theranos founder 'lied and cheated', trial hears
Published September
I was told I miscarried, says patient in Holmes' trial
Published September
Top Stories
Biden angry after teen acquitted of shooting
Published hour ago
Belarus leader: We may have helped migrants into EU
Published hours ago
Dutch police clash with anti-lockdown rioters
Published minutes ago
ADVERTISEMENT
Features
Why did this mum take her children to the IS capital?
Sam
Beaten and handcuffed for wearing a woman's outfit
Nur Sajat
Ros Atkins on… Rising tensions with Russia. VideoRos Atkins on… Rising tensions with Russia
Putin
The school building futures through food. VideoThe school building futures through food
Hamburger
How China censored a tennis star
Chinese tennis player Peng Shuai signing autographs
When Hindus and Muslims joined hands to riot
Newspaper headline
The students taking the 'world's hardest' exams. VideoThe students taking the 'world's hardest' exams
Student studying for the college entrance exam in South Korea
School bus experiment brings hope to French estates
Housing estate in Toulouse
Japan goes from vaccine hesitancy to success
A Tokyo fire brigade staff member (R) administers a dose of the Covid- coronavirus vaccine at Aoyama University in Tokyo on August.
Elsewhere on the BBC
'We said we’d never talk about it again'
How a night out in Glasgow ended in disaster
Michael Byrne
The story of an intense secret affair
Are Marianne and Connell meant to be together?
Normal People
Most Read
Biden angry after teen acquitted of shooting
Theranos boss makes surprise testimony at trial
Outage locks Tesla drivers out of their cars
Harris first woman to get US presidential powers
Deathbed confession sparks Jimmy Hoffa body hunt
Modi backs down after year-long farmer protests
Dutch police clash with anti-lockdown rioters
Belarus leader: We may have helped migrants into EU
Austria to go into full lockdown as Covid surges
Teenager cleared of all charges in US shootings
ADVERTISEMENT
ADVERTISEMENT
BBC News Services